# Comparing travel behavior during 2019 and 2020 in the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission trip records
by Nika Espiritu and Jasper Pangan

New York declared their first COVID-19 case on March 1, 2020. Since then, it has turned local economy upside down and spelled the deaths of thousands of people. For the safety of its people, the government has issued strict stay-at-home orders. For the New York taxi drivers, this has endangered their livelihoods and families. In this paper, we ask how travel patterns and behaviors have changed from 2019 to 2020 with the pandemic in place. To answer this question, we gathered data from the New York City (NYC) Taxi and Limousine Commission (TLC), pre-processed it, and conducted an exploratory data analysis (EDA) to provide descriptive analytics. The dataset considered in this study spans from January 1, 2019 until June 30, 2020, covering until Phase 2 of New York’s reopening plans. From our EDA, we found little change in routes and in travel times of New Yorkers, but instead we found that New Yorkers strictly complied with the stay-at-home measures enacted by the government, thus signifying a drop in the volume of taxi transactions. People usually travelled alone in pre-pandemic times, but this phenomenon increased during the pandemic. We also found that cashless transactions were banned by legislators, and people are experiencing the impacts of this legislation. With the reopening of New York, we are now seeing a small increase in volume of transactions, and this should help NYC taxi drivers.
